
--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 2: Construction Planning and Scheduling 
2.1 Construction Planning
a) Definition:
´âİPlanning is the mental process deciding about the future line of 
action
´âİIt is the course of action to achieve the desired result taking in to 
consideration the present needs and future requirement
´âİDeciding about what to do, when to do, who will do and where to do 
is planning 
´âİVarious alternative methods of execution of work are studied at the 
planning stage and decisions are taken for each part of work 
By MRD 
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Planning
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Planning
b) Objectives of Planning:
´âİProper design of each element
´âİProper selection of equipment
´âİProper arrangement and repair of equipment
´âİProcurement of required materials in advance
´âİEnsure employment of trained and experienced staff
´âİTo provide welfare schemes for staffs
´âİTo provide incentives to good worker
´âİTo arrange constant flow of fund
´âİTo provide proper safety measures
´âİTo provide proper arrangement of communication
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Planning
c) Principles of Planning:
´âİPlan should be readily understandable (i.e. simple language & able 
to convey correct message)
´âİIt should be realistic, flexible and comprehensive 
´âİCan be used as the basis for monitoring and controlling the project
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Planning
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Planning
d) Types of Plan:
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Types of Plan 
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Project Management Activities
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
2.2 Steps and Stages of Planning
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Steps in Planning
´âİIdentify the problems to be encountered and obtain the necessary 
information useful in execution
´âİObtain alternative ways of execution work and select the optimum 
plan
´âİFix time of start of work
´âİDecide quantity and types of resources
´âİEstimate project duration
´âİEstimate financial help
´âİEvaluation of effectiveness of plan 
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Steps in Planning
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Stages of Planning 
1) Pre-Planning:
´âİObjectives are clearly spelt out
´âİGeneral framework of the project is to be formulated
´âİJustification for the construction of the project is to be laid down
´âİCost benefit analysis of the project is to be carried out
´âİCost analysis for all alternative sites is to be done
2) Detailed Planning:
´âİPreparation of detailed design
´âİPreparation of drawings and specifications
´âİWorking out quantities of materials
´âİBreaking the project in to different alternatives
´âİDetailing the sequence of operation of activities & allocating duration
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Stages of Planning
3) Monitoring and Control:
´âİProgress of construction is monitored as per proposal
´âİUpdating the schedule as per progress
´âİPreparing the revised forecast
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Stages of Planning
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
2.3 Planning by Client and Contractor in Different Stages
A) Planning by Client: Client may be an individual or group of 
individuals or Government and itÔÇÖs agencies. 
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Role of Stakeholders in Construction 
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Level of Planning
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
A) Planning by Contractor
a) Pre-tender Stage Planning:
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Work Activities of Contractor
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
b) Contract Stage Planning
´âİAfter acceptance of tender, the contractor further needs intensive 
planning
´âİPre-tender stage planning work is fully utilized for this stage also
Steps for Contract stage planning:
´éğStudy  of alternative methods of construction to choose the most 
economical one
´éğWorking out the quantities of materials, sources of supply and 
comparative cost form different source
´éğWorking out of construction labor, supervisory and managerial staff
´éğSelection of human resource and their recruitment
´éğWorking out the types and quantities of machinery and equipment
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
b) Contract Stage Planning
ÔÇó Repair and maintenance scheme of equipment
ÔÇó Planning for location of camp office, service road layout and other 
facilities
ÔÇó Planning and arranging of transport of labor
ÔÇó To study the interdependency of different items of work
ÔÇó To finalize the work program of each item of work
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
2.4 Preparing Schedule
a) Definition of Schedule
´âİIt is a graphical representation which shows the starting and 
completing dates of each activity & their sequential relationship
´âİIt is the time table for execution of a project
b) Use of scheduling
´âİQuantity of work involved, labor, materials and money required in 
each stage can be determined
´âİActual progress of can be checked
´âİProject can be carried out in a systematic manner
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Scheduling
c) Advantages of scheduling
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Scheduling
d) Preparation of Construction Schedule
´âİProject is divided in to small measurable units of work so that time, 
budget and other resources can be allocated (i.e. preparation of WBS)
´âİStudy of logical sequence of each items
´âİEstimation of quantities of work involved in each operation
´âİEstimation of time required for each operation
e) Classification of Scheduling
´âİConstruction schedule: It is the roaster prepared for the construction 
of different activities of work for the completion of project. 
´âİMaterial schedule: It should be developed at site at least one week 
earlier than itÔÇÖs use.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Scheduling
´âİLabor schedule: The aim of this schedule is to divide the number of skilled 
and unskilled labor. 
´âİEquipment schedule: To decide type, number and dates on which a 
particular equipment will be needed. The main aim is to have optimum use 
of equipment.
´âİFinancial schedule: ItÔÇÖs aim is to find out the amount of money needed 
after completion of different event.
´âİControl schedule: At due date, the in charge of the project has to submit 
the work progress to the head office.
´âİOrganizational schedule: It is the Organizational Breakdown Structure
´âİSummary schedule: It provides the out put of the project
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
Scheduling
f) Method of Scheduling
´âİBar Chart / Gantt Chart
´âİMilestone Chart (Modified Bar Chart)
´âİNet Work Analysis (AOA - Activity on Arrow; AON ÔÇô Activity on Node)
a) CPM
b) PERT
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
2.5 Time cost Trade Off
Definition:
´âİTime-Cost Trade Off analysis involves accelerated activity durations 
that are obtained by allocating more resources, and lead to shorter 
project duration and lower indirect cost at the expense of higher 
direct cost 
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
Objective of Time Cost Trade Off 
ÔÇó The objective of Time Cost Trade Off is to reduce the original project duration, 
determined from critical path analysis to meet a specific dead line, with the least 
cost of the project.
ÔÇó Project duration can be reduced by adjusting overlaps between critical activities
or by reducing the duration of critical activities.
ÔÇó While reducing the duration of critical activities, direct cost (related the labor 
cost) increases because of extra payment for use of seasonal labors / overtime 
work etc. but indirect cost decreases because of reduction of project duration. 
ÔÇó After doing such trials, total cost of the project (direct cost + indirect cost) 
decreases up to certain limit and starts to increase. While doing many trials, we 
will get minimum total cost. The project duration corresponding to minimum 
total project cost is optimum project duration.
ÔÇó The aim of time cost trade off is to obtain minimum possible project cost,
optimum project duration and corrected schedule as per optimum project 
duration.   
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Terminology related Time Cost Trade Off
´âİNormal cost 
´âİNormal duration
´âİCrash cost 
´âİCrash duration
´âİCost slope
´âİCritical path 
´âİCritical activities
´âİDirect cost
´âİIndirect cost 
´âİTotal cost
´âİOptimum project duration
´âİMinimum total cost 
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
Time Cost Trade Off
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
Reasons to Reduce Project Durations
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
Direct and Indirect Cost of the Project
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
Time Cost Trade Off Model
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
Steps  to be followed for Time-Cost Trade Off 
´âİPrepare CPM network and obtain project duration.
´âİCalculate floats and identify critical activities and critical path/paths.
´âİCalculate the cost slope of all activities.
´âİChoose the one critical activity (among the activities) having 
minimum cost slope and reduce the duration of it by one unit of time 
(i.e. day or week as per given). 
´âİIf we choose more unit at one step then there may chance of being 
the another path also critical. 
´âİIn such situation, we have to add the cost slope of both parallel 
activities and it must be compared with the cost slope of other 
activities to get least cost slope for getting direct cost. 
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
Steps  to be followed for Time-Cost Trade Off 
´âİWe have to calculate the indirect cost of the project for each step 
using the available project duration after crashing the 
activity/activities since indirect cost (overhead cost) is given.  
´âİObtain total project cost (direct cost + indirect cost) in each step. 
´âİUp to certain limit, total project cost decreases and becomes 
minimum then increases.
´âİProject duration corresponding to minimum total project cost is the 
optimum project duration. 
´âİPrepare the revised schedule having optimum duration which 
contains crashed activities. 
´âİPlot the graph for direct cost, indirect cost and total cost.         
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
Time-Cost Trade Off Curve
Balancing (indirect) overhead and direct cost
Activity Time Cost Trade Off
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
Time Cost Trade Off and Cost Slope for an Activity
Tim-Cost Trade off and Cost Slope for an Activity
Activity Time-Cost Relationship
37
Cost Slope

--- PAGE 38 ---
Time-Cost Trade Off Curve
Project cost definition
Time-cost trade off
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
Time cost Trade off 
Time cost trade off in a project schedule
Illustration of Non Linear time cost trade off for an activity  
39

--- PAGE 40 ---
Time Cost Trade Off 
Project Completion time
40

--- PAGE 41 ---
Tutorial 1. (Time Cost Trade Off)
Obtain minimum cost of the project using time cost trade off and optimum duration. Also prepare 
the least cost schedule.
41

--- PAGE 42 ---
Tutorial 2. (Time Cost Trade Off)
Consider the project time cost data in table 2. The indirect cost of the 
project is $400 per week. Prepare the least cost schedule. 
42

--- PAGE 43 ---
Tutorial 3. (Time Cost Trade Off)
Overhead per week is $450. Obtain the least cost schedule and optimum duration of it. 
43

--- PAGE 44 ---
Tutorial 4. (Time Cost Trade Off)
The following table provides the data related to the normal and crash time and cost 
of a construction project. A network diagram of it is also given. Compute the least 
cost schedule. The indirect cost per week is $7500.
44

--- PAGE 45 ---
Tutorial 5. (Time Cost Trade Off) 
The net work schedule and 
necessary data of a construction 
project are given. Compute the 
Optimum duration and least cost 
schedule. The overhead of the 
project is $650. 
45
