
--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 4: Familiarization with Construction Equipment
4.1 Advantages and Drawbacks of Using Equipment
Advantages:
´âİIncrease the rate of output of work
´âİReduce the overall construction cost
´âİCarry out activities which canÔÇÖt be done by manually
´âİEquipment can work in adverse weather climate and topography
´âİReduce fatigue and eliminates hazards & health issues
´âİMaintain the planned rate of production where there is shortage of labor
´âİMaintain high quality standards  
´âİEquipment is free from social and emotional factors
´âİIt helps maintaining construction site safer and cleaner                               
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Advantages and Disadvantages Using Equipment
Drawbacks:
´âİIf the machine breaks down, it can cause delay of construction
´âİElectric tools can cause short circuit which may result in fire
´âİOnly trained and skilled labor can operate the equipment
´âİIt may harm health of the people on site
´âİHeavy investment for buying equipment
´âİLarge inventory of spare parts
´âİMay create social problem due the unemployment of people
´âİReselling / disposing off  construction equipment will be a problem   
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
4.2 Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction 
A)
Earth Work Equipment
´âİExcavating Equipment:
Excavator, Back Hoes, Dozer, Scraper, Drag Line, Power Sovel & Grader  
´âİWatering and Dewatering Equipment:
´éğDisplacement Pump (Reciprocating Pump, Diaphram)
´éğCentrifugal Pump (Conventional, Self-Priming, Air-Operated)
´âİLoading Equipment: 
´âİTransporting Equipment: 
Dozer, Grader, Scraper, Power Sovel, Drag Line, Tractor, Triger, Dumper   
´âİCompacting Equipment:
Tamping Rod, Hand Compactor, Tamping Roller, Smooth Wheel Roller, Pneumatic 
Roller, Sheep Foot Roller, Vibrating Roller, Rammer, Frog Rammer, 
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction
´âİDrilling and Blasting Equipment:  
Jack Hammer, Drifter, Wagon Drill, Track Mounted Drill, 
B) Lifting and Erecting Equipment: Fixed Crane (Tower Crane)
C) Concerting Equipment:
´âİAggregate Production Equipment: 
Primary Crusher, Secondary Crusher, Tertiary Crusher, Screening
´âİAggregate Handling Equipment: 
Truck, Dumper, Conveyor Belt
´âİConcrete Mixing Equipment: 
Hand fed drum mixture, Self loading drum mixture, Concrete mixing pan, 
Transit mixture, Mixing plant
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction 
´âİConcrete Transportation (Handling & Placing):
Metal pan, Wheel barrow, Minidumper, Crane, Conveyor belt system, 
Concrete pump,
´âİConcrete Compaction Equipment:
Needle vibrator, Surface vibrator, Form vibrator, Tamping rod  
D) Tunneling Equipment:
Tunnel boring machine, Drilling machine, Electric detonating 
arrangement, Ventilating arrangement, Wheel barrow, Compressor, 
Drilling machine
E) Foundation Equipment: Pile boring machine, Pile driving machine
F) Steel Construction Equipment:
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction 
Equipment for Excavation:
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Excavator
´âİExcavators are important and widely used equipment in construction 
industry. 
´âİThey use for excavation as well as other many purposes like heavy 
lifting, demolition, river dredging, cutting of trees etc.
´âİExcavators contains a long arm and a cabinet.
´âİAt the end of long arm digging bucket is provided.
´âİCabinet is the place provided for machine operator.
´âİThis whole cabin arrangement can be rotatable up to 360 degree.
´âİExcavators are available in both wheeled and tracked forms of 
vehicles.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Excavator
Tracked Excavator
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Excavator
Levelled Diagram
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Backhoe
´âİBackhoe is another widely used equipment which is suitable for 
multiple purposes. 
´âİThe name itself telling that the hoe arrangement is provided on the 
back side of vehicle. 
´âİWhile loading bucket is provided in the front.
´âİThis is well useful for excavating trenches below the machine level
´âİUsing front bucket loading, unloading and lifting of materials can be 
done.
´âİThe basic parts are boom, Jack boom, boom foot drum, boom 
sheave, stick sheave, bucket and bucket sheave.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Backhoe
Backhoe
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Backhoe
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Drag Line Excavator
´âİDragline excavator is another heavy equipment used in construction 
generally used for larger depth excavations. 
´âİIt consists a long length boom and digging bucket is suspended from 
the top of the boom using cable.
´âİIt is used for the construction of ports, for excavations under water, 
sediment removal in water bodies
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Drag line Excavator
Drag line Excavator 
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Drag Line Excavator
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Bulldozer
´âİBulldozer is soil excavating equipment used to remove the topsoil, 
rock strata, lifting of soil.
´âİThe removal of soil is done by the sharp edged wide metal plate 
provided at its front. 
´âİThis plate can be lowered and raised using hydraulic pistons.
´âİA bulldozer is a crawler equipped with a substantial metal plate and 
at the rear with a claw like device to loosen densely compacted 
materials
´âİIt is used to push large quantities of soil, sand, rubble etc.
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Bulldozer
Bulldozer
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Bulldozer
Levelled Diagram:
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Bulldozer
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Grader
´âİIt is used in road construction 
´âİIt is mainly used to level the soil surface. 
´âİIt contains a horizontal blade in between front and rear wheels 
´âİThis blade is lowered in to the ground while working. 
´âİOperating cabin is provided on the top of rear axle arrangement.
´âİMotor Graders are also used to remove snow or dirt from the roads
´âİIt is used to flatten the surface of soil before laying asphalt layer. 
´âİIt is also used to remove unnecessary soil layer from the ground.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Grader 
Graders are classified as below
a) Based on weight:
´âİHeavy (17-23 tons)
´âİMedium (10-12 tons)
´âİLight (´Ç╝10 tons)
b) Based on design of running gears, as four wheelers & six-wheelers
c) Based on control system, as mechanical and hydraulic grader
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Grader 
Grader
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Wheel Tractor Scraper
´âİIt is earth moving equipment used to provide flatten soil surface 
through scrapping. 
´âİFront part contains wheeled tractor vehicle and rear part contains a 
scrapping arrangement such as horizontal front blade, conveyor belt 
and soil collecting hopper.
´âİWhen the front blade is lowered onto the ground and vehicle is 
moved, the blade starts digging the soil above the blade level and the 
soil excavated is collected in hopper through conveyor belt. 
´âİWhen the hopper is full, the rear part is raised from the ground and 
hopper is unloaded at soil dump yard.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Wheel Tractor Scraper
Scraper
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
Trencher 
´âİTrencher or Trenching machine is used to excavate trench in soil. 
´âİTrench is generally used for pipeline laying, cable laying, drainage 
purposes etc. 
´âİTrenching machine is available in two types namely chain trencher 
and wheeled trencher.
´âİA trencher contains a fixed long arm around which digging chain is 
provided. 
´âİWheeled trencher contains a metal wheel with digging tooth around 
it which excavates hard soil layer. 
´âİBoth types of trenchers are available in tracked as well as wheeled 
vehicle forms.
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
Wheeled Trencher
Trencher
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
Loader
´âİLoader is used in construction site to load the material onto dumpers, 
trucks etc. 
´âİThe materials may be excavated soil, demolition waste, raw 
materials.
´âİA loader contain large sized bucket at its front with shorter moving 
arm.
´âİLoader may be either tracked or wheeled. 
´âİWheeled loader is widely used in sites while tracked or crawled 
loader is used in site where wheeled vehicle cannot reach.
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Loader 
Loader
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
Lifting and Erecting Equipment (Tower Crane)
´âİTower crane is fixed crane which is used for hoisting purposes in 
construction of tall structures. 
´âİHeavy materials like pre-stressed concrete blocks, steel trusses. 
frames etc. can be easily lifted to required height using this type of 
equipment.
´âİIt consists mast which is the vertical supporting tower.
´âİJib which is operating arm of crane. 
´âİCounter jib which is the other arm carries counter weight on rear side 
of crane. 
´âİAn operator cabin from which the crane can be operated.
´âİTower crane is fabricated by the truss elements
´âİMovable (transporting) crane is also used in construction
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
Tower Crane
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
Tower Crane
Levelled Diagram
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
Paver
´âİPaver or Asphalt paver is pavement laying equipment. 
´âİIt is used in road construction. 
´âİPaver contains a feeding bucket in which asphalt is continuously 
loaded by the dump truck.
´âİPaver distributes the asphalt evenly on the road surface with slight 
compaction. 
´âİHowever a roller is required after laying asphalt layer for perfect 
compaction.
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
Asphalt Paver
Paver
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
Compactor
´âİCompactor or Roller is used to compact the material or earth surface.
´âİDifferent types of compactors are available for different compacting
purposes.
´âİSmooth wheel rollers are used for compacting shallow layers of soil 
or asphalt etc. 
´âİSheep-foot roller is used for deep compaction purposes. 
´âİPneumatic tired roller is used for compacting fine grained soils, 
asphalt layers etc.
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
Smooth wheel Compactor
Compactor
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
Telehandler
´âİTelehandler is hoisting equipment used in construction to lift heavy 
materials up to required height
´âİTo provide construction platform for workers at greater heights etc. 
´âİIt contains a long telescopic boom which can be raised or lowered or 
forwarded.
´âİDifferent types of arrangements like forklifts, buckets, cabin, lifting 
jibs etc. can be attached to the end of telescopic boom based on the 
requirement of job.
37

--- PAGE 38 ---
Telehandler
Telehandler
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
Feller Buncher
´âİFeller buncher is tree cutting heavy equipment.
´âİIt is used to remove large trees in the construction field. 
´âİIt cuts the tree and grab it without felling. 
´âİLikewise gathers all the cut down trees at one place which makes job 
easier for loaders and dump trucks.
39

--- PAGE 40 ---
Feller Buncher
40

--- PAGE 41 ---
Transporting Equipment
´âİTrucks, wagons, and conveyor belts are hauling equipment.
´âİThey transport deposits from one place to another place.
Classification of truck:
´éğSize of engine
´éğNo of gears
´éğKind of drives
´éğNo of wheels arrangement
´éğMethod of dumping loads: rear/side
´éğClass of material hauled: earth /rock/coal /ore etc.
´éğCapacity in tones
41

--- PAGE 42 ---
Transporting & Compacting Equipment
Transporting Equipment:
Following also are fully or partially serves as the transporting equipment are: 
Dozers, Grader, Scraper, Power Shovel, Drag Line, Dumper & Trippers.
Compacting Equipment:
To increase the strength of the soil, compaction is done for which various types of 
equipment are available. 
´âİTamping rod
´âİHand Compactor
´âİTamping rod
´âİPneumatic Roller
´âİSheep Foot Roller
´âİVibrating Roller  
42

--- PAGE 43 ---
Compacting Equipment
Rammer:
´âİSimplest type of compacting equipment
´âİHeavy Iron weight is provided by a wooden handle.
´âİThe soil surface can be compacted by lifting and releasing in a cycle.
Frog Rammer: 
´âİRammer with small ramming plate
´âİJumps with the help of engine mounted on the top
´âİSuitable for very small trenches 
Compactor:
´âİHand held vibrating plate 
´âİDiesel / Petrol engine mounted on springs over vibrating plate gives vibration 
43

--- PAGE 44 ---
Compacting Equipment
Hand Roller/ Tamping Roller:
´âİSuitable for compacting small trenches (90 cm to 1.2m) wide
´âİBoth vibrating and static load type available
´âİSingle steel drum is the common type 
Smooth wheel Roller
Pneumatic Roller
Sheep foot Roller
Vibrating Roller
Vibrating Roller
44

--- PAGE 45 ---
Dump Truck
´âİDump truck is used in construction sites to carry the material in 
larger quantities from one site to another site or to the dump yard.
´âİGenerally, in big construction site, off-road dump truck is used.
´âİThese off-road dump truck contains large wheels with huge space for 
materials
´âİIt enables to carry huge quantity of material in any type of ground 
conditions.
45

--- PAGE 46 ---
Dump Truck
Dump Truck
46

--- PAGE 47 ---
Dump Truck
Dump Truck
47

--- PAGE 48 ---
Pile Boring Equipment
´âİPile boring equipment is used to make bore holes in the construction site to 
install precast piles.
48

--- PAGE 49 ---
Pile Driving Equipment
ÔÇó It is also the heavy equipment used in construction site
ÔÇó It is used in pile foundation construction. 
ÔÇó This equipment lifts the pile and holds it in proper position and drives 
into the ground up to required depth.
ÔÇó Different types of pile driving equipment are available namely, piling 
rigs, piling hammer, hammer guides etc. 
ÔÇó In any case the pile is driven into the ground by hammering the pile 
top which is done hydraulically or by dropping.
49

--- PAGE 50 ---
Hydraulic Pile Driving Machine
Pile Driving Equipment
50

--- PAGE 51 ---
Power Shovel
Power Shovel
51

--- PAGE 52 ---
Power Shovel
Power Shovel
52

--- PAGE 53 ---
Bulldozer
Bulldozer
53

--- PAGE 54 ---
Scrapers
Scrapper
54

--- PAGE 55 ---
Dragline
Dragline
55

--- PAGE 56 ---
Equipment for Transportation and Compaction
Transportation & Compaction Equipment
56

--- PAGE 57 ---
Equipment for Transportation and Compaction
Compaction Equipment
57

--- PAGE 58 ---
Aggregate Production and Handling
Stone Crushing Machine
58

--- PAGE 59 ---
Aggregate Production and Handling
Aggregate Crushing plant:
59

--- PAGE 60 ---
Aggregate Production and Handling
´âİAfter receiving stones or boulders from the quarry, they are crushed 
into smaller size as required to meet the standard of designer.
´âİCrushed material is then sieved and different size are separated.
´âİThe crushers are also classified based on the stage of crushing as 
below:
Primary Crusher:
´éğAt this stage, stones are directly received from the quarry and first reduction in 
size takes place
´éğThe aggregates obtained will be coarser and non-uniform.
´éğJaw crushers,  Revolving crusher and Hammer mills are the equipment used at 
this stage  
60

--- PAGE 61 ---
Aggregate Production and Handling
Secondary Crusher:
´éğThe crushed stones received from the first stage are put into the secondary 
crusher to further reduce the size of the aggregates. 
´éğConcrete crushers, Roll crushers and Hammer mills are the equipment used at 
this stage 
Tertiary Crusher:
´éğFinal stage after which the aggregates of required sizes are obtained. 
´éğHowever some stones need to pass through further more crushers also to reduce 
the size.
´éğRoll crushers, Roll mills, and Ball mills are the equipment used for this stage. 
61

--- PAGE 62 ---
Aggregate Production and Handling
Screening: 
´éğIt is done to eliminate or separate over size crushed stones. 
´éğScreen cloth, revolving screen and vibrating screens are used for screening of aggregates.
´éğWashing of aggregates is also essential task.
´éğFor mass production, aggregates are screened from multideck screening plant
´éğDifferent transporting equipment (e. g. truck, dumpers, conveyor belt etc.) are used. 
´éğCapacity of screen is given by formula, Q = ACEDG 
Where,
Q = capacity of screen (ton per hour)
A = Area of screen (Square feet)
C = Theoretical capacity of screen (ton per hour/ square feet)
E = Efficiency factor
D = Deck Factor
G = Aggregate size factor 
62

--- PAGE 63 ---
Concrete Construction 
´âİConcrete production is a stage of concrete construction 
Manufacturing Process of Ready-mix Concrete
63

--- PAGE 64 ---
Concrete Construction
ÔÇó The following arrow diagram makes us clear about the concrete 
construction procedure
Material Production 
Storage 
Before Construction 
Batching
Mixing
Transportation
Placing 
During Construction
Compaction
Curing
64

--- PAGE 65 ---
Concrete Construction
Martial Production:
´âİCement: Direct from Factory/ Shop
´âİSand: From River
´âİCoarse Aggregates: From river or From crusher after seiving
Storage:
´âİCement requires special storage because it is very sensitive to the moisture proof platform
´âİIn huge construction works, they are transported by special means powder cement is stored in 
cement silo.
Batching:
´âİVolumetric Batching: Mixing by proportion of Volume. Suitable for small job.
´âİWeight Batching: Mixing by proportion of weight. Suitable for large construction.
65

--- PAGE 66 ---
Concrete Construction
Equipment for Batching:
a) Gauge Box: Used for volumetric 
batching and small scale work.
b) Ordinary batching Scale: 
´éğUsed for small and medium scale works
´éğUsed for weight batching
´éğGenerally used in lab
´éğTime consuming and costly
c) Batching Plant:
´éğLarge scale job are done through automatic batching plant
´éğThe main function of it is to receive various ingredient of concrete, weight them 
to required proportion and then transfer to mixing plant. 
Gauge Box
66

--- PAGE 67 ---
Concrete Batching Plant
67

--- PAGE 68 ---
Concrete Batching Plant
68

--- PAGE 69 ---
Concrete Mixing
´âİTo produce homogeneous and uniform concrete, mixing of ingredients should be 
done properly.
´âİFor small scale work (V ´Ç╝1 m3), hand mixing is suitable suitable
´âİTo obtain uniform concrete, turn three times 
´âİFor large scale work ( V´Ç¥1 m3), machine mixing is done
´âİIt is more efficient and economical than hand mixing
Methods of Mixing:
Hand Mixing: Used for small scale work. Add 10 % more cement. 
Machine Mixing: For large scale work 
69

--- PAGE 70 ---
Equipment Used for Concrete Mixing
a) Hand Fed Drum Mixer
b) Self Loading Concrete Mixture
c) Concrete Mixing Pan
d) Transit Mixture
e) Mixing Plant
70

--- PAGE 71 ---
Concrete Construction
Concrete Mixing Pan                            Concrete Transit Mixture
71

--- PAGE 72 ---
Transportation (Handling & Placing)
´âİConcrete should be mixed, handled, placed in position and compacted as quickly 
as possible after the water is added. 
´âİIn no cases this time shouldnÔÇÖt exceed initial setting time of cement.
´âİFor late setting of concrete, admixtures can be added.
´âİDuring handling, improper method may lead to the segregation of concrete 
which lead to low strength of it.
´âİThe most common equipment for handling of concrete are as below:
Metal Pan, Wheel barrows, Builders hoist, Mini dumper, Conveyer belt system and 
Concrete pumps.
Compaction of Concrete: It is the process of obtaining the dense concrete mass by 
removing the entrapped air. Poor compaction leads to honey comb concrete which 
reduces the strength of concrete. So, optimum compaction is needed.   
Equipment: Needle Vibrators, Surface Vibrator, Form Vibrator and Tamping rod
72

--- PAGE 73 ---
Concrete and Curing
Curing of Concrete: 
´âİHydration of cement is the cause of hardness and strength of concrete mass.
´âİHydration takes a long time even for a year
´âİBut maximum of strength is gained in about below 10 days.
´âİTo attain maximum strength, concrete should be cured with adequate moisture. 
´âİThe loss of moisture due to evaporation is accomplished by keeping surface wet. 
Methods of  concrete curing are:  
´âİSprinkle water at regular interval
´âİCover concrete surface with film of chemical/ jute mesh/ layer of sand which 
prevents from evaporation of concrete surface.
73

--- PAGE 74 ---
Tunnel Construction
´âİTunnel is the underground passage for travelling and navigation. 
´âİIt is an artificially constructed underground passage to by- pass obstacles safely without 
disturbing the over burden. 
´âİTunneling is desirable when Rapid transport facilities are required which needs to avoid 
acquisition of land for roads. 
´âİTunnels are also erected when shortest route connection is needed in cities.
´âİTunnels permit easy gradient & encourage high speed on strategic routes.
Purpose:
´âİPassage way for roads and rail roads
´âİConduits for water supply/ hydropower
´âİAccess to mines and underground space
´âİPassage for Pedestrians etc.
´âİThe primary objectives of the tunnel alignments are to reduce transit trip times, increase 
quality and reliability of service and minimize impacts of surface transit operations in 
sensitive locations.
74

--- PAGE 75 ---
Tunnel Construction
´âİRatio of length to width, in a tunnel , should always be at least in 2: 1. 
´âİA tunnel must be completely enclosed on all sides along the length. 
The types of tunnels are classified based on three aspects: 
´âİBased on purpose (road, rail, utilities), 
´âİBased on surrounding material (soft clay vs. hard rock ) & 
´âİSubmerged tunnels
Economics of Tunneling depend on: 
´âİNature of Soil/ rock
´âİRequirements of fill 
´âİDepth of cut > 18m ÔÇôtunneling
75

--- PAGE 76 ---
Tunnel Construction
Tunnel Design Criteria: 
´âİTunneling requires proper design. 
´âİEvery tunnel will have its own geometry, design, alignment, and 
construction methods. 
Tunnel design criteria include the following: 
´âİSpatial Requirements; 
´âİAlignment; 
´âİUnderground Stations; 
´âİFire Life Safety; and 
´âİTunnel Systems and Operation.
´âİEvery tunnel will have its own horizontal and vertical alignment, Tunnel 
Ventilation, Tunnel Lighting, Electrical and Safety Equipment, Drainage, Fire 
Life Safety, Security. 
76

--- PAGE 77 ---
Tunnel Construction
The following factors should be taken into consideration when selecting the 
method of Tunnel construction:
´âİTunnel dimensions 
´âİTunnel geometry
´âİLength of tunnel
´âİTotal volume to be excavated 
´âİGeological and rock mechanical conditions 
´âİGround water level and expected water inflow
´âİVibration restrictions & 
´âİAllowed ground settlements
77

--- PAGE 78 ---
Tunnel Construction
Selection of Tunnel alignment depends on: 
ÔÇó Topography of area & points of entrance and exit
ÔÇó Selection of site of tunnel to be made considering two points
ÔÇó Alignment restraints
ÔÇó Environmental Considerations 
ÔÇó Tunnel portal ÔÇô the interface point of the open cut and the cut and cover tunnel
Classification of Tunnels:
Based on Alignment: Off-Spur tunnels, Short length tunnels to negotiate minor 
obstacles.
Saddle or Base Tunnels : Tunnels constructed in valleys along natural slope.
Slope Tunnels : Constructed in steep hills for economic and safe operation.
Spiral Tunnels : constructed in narrow valleys in form of loops in interior of 
mountains so as to increase length of tunnel to avoid steep slopes.
78

--- PAGE 79 ---
Tunnel Construction
Conventional method , Tunnel Boring Machine (TBM Method)  and New Austrian Tunneling 
Method (NATM)
Conventional Method of Tunnel Construction (Steps): 
´âİExcavation of earth, Removal of excavated earth  and Lining and strengthen of wall and ceiling  
Conventional Method of Tunnel Construction (Process):
´âİSetting up & drilling
´âİLoading holes and softening explosives
´âİVentilating and removing the dust following an explosion
´âİLoading and hauling muck
´âİRemoving ground water if necessary
´âİErecting supports for roof and sides if necessary 
´âİPlacing reinforcing steel
´âİPlacing the concrete lining
79

--- PAGE 80 ---
Equipment Used in Tunnel Construction
´âİDrilling machine
´âİElectric detonating arrangement
´âİVentilating arrangement
´âİWheel barrow, trucks and loader, rail buggies ( muck cars) 
´âİPumps
´âİFormwork and support
´âİConcreting machine/ batching plant/ concrete pump  
80

--- PAGE 81 ---
Introduction to TBM
Introduction
´âİTunnel Boring Machine (TBM) is used to excavate
tunnels with a circular cross section.
´âİThey can be used on any geologies.
´âİIt can bore tunnel of diameter 1 to 20 meter
´âİIt made tunnel boring process risk fee. 
Drawback Using TBM   
´âİHigh cost due to the need of supporting 
things such as conveyer belt, rails, slurry 
separating plant, slurry pipelines etc.
´âİHigh cost of associates supplies e. g.
drill bits, TBM cutters, blasting agents etc.
81

--- PAGE 82 ---
Tunnel Boring Machine (TBM)
Comparison of Different Types of TBM 
82

--- PAGE 83 ---
Terminology Related to Tunnel Boring
83

--- PAGE 84 ---
4.3 Selection of Appropriate Equipment
Importance of Construction Equipment
´âİIn Case of major construction projects, the speed of work and the 
timely completion of work is very important. 
´âİThe mechanization of most of the construction work is required, in 
which the construction equipment play the most important role. 
´âİThe proper use of the appropriate equipment contribute to economy, 
quality, safety, speedy and timely completion of the project. 
´âİThe cost of construction is a major factor in all the projects. 
´âİThe factors that influence construction costs mainly are materials, 
labor, construction equipment, overhead and profit.
84

--- PAGE 85 ---
Importance of Construction Equipment
´âİThe cost of construction equipment for civil engineering construction 
projects ranges from 25 % to 40 % of the total project. 
´âİThe amount which is invested in the purchase of a construction 
equipment should be recovered during the useful period of such 
equipment.
´âİThe construction equipment are deployed on the construction 
projects for the various reasons, such as
85

--- PAGE 86 ---
Criteria for Selecting Construction Equipment
Technology: 
´âİThe focus should be on machines that are appropriate for the job at hand, the 
environment and terrain it needs to work in and the people operating the 
machine. 
´âİTechnical literacy amongst operators is a rather difficult thing to come by in 
operators these days. 
´âİAs a matter of fact, most operators find these advanced machines to be more of a 
hassle. 
´âİThe make of the important parts like engine, hydraulics and the transmission etc. 
play a vital role in the service premium of the machine and its resale value. 
´âİSo look for a machine where technology is appropriate.
86

--- PAGE 87 ---
Criteria for Selecting Construction Equipment
Fuel Efficiency: 
´âİFuel usually consists up to 60% of the costs involved and so fuel efficiency should be 
given prime importance. 
´âİExperts recommend that fuel consumption be measured and considered based on cost 
per unit of output instead of measuring it by the hour. 
´âİDouble and triple check how efficient the machine in question is before buying or renting 
it.
After Sales support: 
´âİExpertise in matter of heavy construction equipment is a difficult thing to find. 
´âİSo, when choosing a machine ensure that the replacement parts are easily available and 
appropriately priced. 
´âİAdditionally, ensure that adequate after sales support is available at short notices since 
machine down time is usually not welcome. 
´âİEnsure that there is adequate appropriate support available before zeroing in onto 
machine.
87

--- PAGE 88 ---
Criteria for Selecting Construction Equipment
´âİReliability and ruggedness: 
´âİThe machines should be suited to be able to handle the vast differences of the 
terrain and climate that the various job sites.
´âİMachines have to reliable and asking for more than 95% uptime is not stretching 
it given the kind of technology available today. 
´âİAn unreliable machine will have both direct and collateral cost damages. 
´âİSay if a asphalt compact was to break down, it would leave a truck full of hot 
bitumen stranded, adding to the cost of the project. 
´âİSo, reliable rugged machines should be preferred.
88

--- PAGE 89 ---
Criteria for Selecting Construction Equipment
Price: 
ÔÇó Ensure that the machine is appropriately priced for what it has to offer. 
ÔÇó Considering a 10% per year depreciation value, a machine should last for atlas 10 
years, pay for itself and earn profits if one has to buy a machine. 
ÔÇó Most buyers ask cheaper products and expect them to last at least 2-4 project 
cycles. 
ÔÇó When it comes to machines various costs come into play. 
ÔÇó The yearly depreciation of the machineÔÇÖs value, fuel costs, insurance, storage, 
maintenance, logistic costs, operator costs and spare parts cost to name a few. 
ÔÇó Take these things into consideration when wanting to select the construction 
equipment.
89
