
--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 5: Contract Management
5.1 Method of Work Execution
´âİSurvey
´éğDesk Study (completed)
´éğPreliminary Survey (completed)
´éğDetailed Survey (going on)
´âİDesign, Drawing and Specification
´âİCost Estimate 
´âİApproval 
´âİTendering Process
´éğTender Notice
´éğTender document preparation 
´éğBuying/ selling tender documents by prospective bidder
´éğSubmission of bid/tender by bidders
´éğEvaluation of bid
´éğSelection of contractor  
´éğSigning / award of contract 
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Method of Work Execution
Generally owner have following choices for work execution
1) Amanat:
´âİWorks are executed by the owner itself, by hiring workers and supplying materials and 
equipment. 
´âİThe record of labor employed, materials and equipment are maintained in book keeping. 
´âİIt is useful for small work, if it is necessary to do immediately and expertise are available 
with in the organization. 
´âİIt saves the cost and keeps the staff busy in work.
2) Negotiation: 
´âİContract is awarded through negotiation with the contractor. 
3) Contract: 
´âİIt is the agreement between two of more parties to do or not to do any work. 
´âİIt is legal and time bound 
´âİOffer and acceptance must be there. 
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Method of Work Execution
As per public procurement act of Nepal, there are following provisions of work   
Execution.
A) Sealed Competitive Bidding: Contractor is selected based on the competition among 
the bidders (contractors).
1) International Competitive Bidding (ICB)
´âİIt will be as per agreement with donor agency. 
´âİIf Nepalese contractors have no experience or not capable. 
´âİIf no bid is submitted by Nepalese contractors in stated time.
´âİNotice on invitation to tender and all tender or prequalification documents shall be 
published in English language. 
´âİIn publishing a notice a period of at least 45 days shall be given
´âİNotice shall be published in daily newspaper of national and international 
communication media.
´âİNotice shall be placed in website of concerned entity or that of the Public Procurement 
Monitoring office (PPMO).
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Method of Work Execution
2) National / Local  Competitive Bidding (NCB/LCB) 
´âİContractors are invited from within the nation or local.
´âİIf Construction work estimated exceeds Rs. Twenty lakhs.
´âİGood & services estimated exceeds Rs. Ten lakhs.
´âİIn publishing a notice a period of at least 30 days shall be given
´âİNotice shall be published in daily newspaper of national and it may also be published in 
international communication media. 
´âİNotice shall be placed in website of concerned entity or that of (PPMO). 
B) Sealed Quotation (SQ)
´âİTime required for this is shorter than NCB.
´âİIf Construction work estimated less or equal to Rs. Twenty lakhs.
´âİGood & services estimated less or equal to Rs. Ten lakhs.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Method of Work Execution
C) Direct Procurement (DP) 
´âİConstruction work up to Rs. Five lakhs
´âİGoods or Consultancy services or other services up to Rs. Three lakhs
D) UserÔÇÖs Committee (UC) 
´âİWorks up to Rs. Sixty lakhs can do by UserÔÇÖs Committee. 
´âİThis Method is used for executing small labor intensive works where the objective is to:
´éğProvide employment and income directly to persons living in the project area
´éğIncrease the utilization of local know how, appropriate technologies and materials
´éğHandover the completed works for operation and maintenance directly by persons 
living in project area.   
E) Procurement Under Special Circumstances
´âİEmergency/ Special circumstances 
´âİDepends on contract amount
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Types of Contract
There are two broad categories of construction contracts
A) Price Based
´âİLump sum or unit rate contracts
´âİPrice or rates are submitted by contractor in tender
B) Cost Based
´âİCost-reimbursable and target cost contract 
´âİActual cost incurred by the contractors is reimbursed together with a fee for overheads 
and profit. 
Lump Sum Contract: 
´âİSome times called drawings & specifications contract
´âİIf the quantities of work are difficult to measure, it may be useful e.g. ground water pipe 
line installation. 
´âİIt shall specify that the construction entrepreneur shall be responsible for all types of 
risks and liabilities associated with the construction work. 
´âİIf the financial liabilities increases as a consequence of an order issued by the public 
entity that involves any change in the construction work upon making the contract, the 
public entity shall bear the liabilities.  
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Lump Sum Contract 
Advantages: 
´âİThe final price is known by the owner before the work commences.
´âİThe contractor has more incentive to reduce cost & to increase profit.
´âİThe contractor hopes to complete the job as quickly as possible to minimize 
overhead, to maximize profit and to move to next job.
Disadvantages: 
´âİChanges in drawings and specifications can be very expensive and source of 
trouble (i.e. contract has very limited flexibility for design changes).
´âİThe contractor carries much of the risk so, the tendered price may include high 
risk contingency.
´âİCompetent contractor may decide not to bid to avoid high risk.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Unit price (BOQ) Contract
´âİIt may be entered where the quantity of a construction work is difficult to be ascertained.
´âİwhere the construction work is to be procured on the basis of unit price set forth in the bill of 
quantity.  
´âİThe bidder has to include in such unit price the materials, labor and other matters required to 
complete the proposed construction work. 
´âİThe public entity shall make such payment on the basis of the unit of work actually done and 
measured in the field. 
Advantages: 
´âİFair basis for competition 
´âİIn comparing with lump-sum contract,
´éğChanges in contract documents can be made easily by the owner
´éğLower risk for contractor
Disadvantages:
´âİThe exact final price of the project is not known until the completion of the project. 
´âİUp to date  account and record keeping is necessary.
´âİPossibility of submitting unbalanced bid.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Cost Reimbursable Contract
´âİThis contract may be entered into for procuring a construction work involving high risk and 
unpredictable condition when a construction entrepreneur  refuse to, or be unable to, perform 
the work under a unit price contract. 
´âİWhile making the payment, it includes the actual cost incurred by entrepreneur, overheads and  
profit set forth in the approved cost estimate.   
Advantages: 
´âİStart construction without waiting the whole set of drawings and specifications.
´âİMore flexibility for the owner to make changes as work progresses.
´âİDraw the contractor expertise during design.
Disadvantages:
´âİIt is difficult to predict the final cost and the distribution of it which may cause 
financial problems to the owner.
´âİContractor pays less alternation to cost control
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Design and Built Construction (Turn Key Contract)
´âİA design and built contract may be entered for procuring the design and built of 
any construction from the same entrepreneur. 
´âİThe work shall commence only after the public entity has thorough its technician 
or group of technicians examined and approved the design of construction work.  
´âİIn this contract, the owner enters into a single agreement by which the design 
and build contractor agrees to perform both the design and construction of the 
project. 
´âİAs well as being responsible for faulty workmanship in construction, the 
contractor is also liable for any deficiencies in design under this. 
´âİIt is usually the preferred contracting method under tight schedule 
circumstances and it is intended to save time.  
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Design and Built Construction (Turn Key Contract)
Advantages:
Disputes between owner and contractor which arises because of design fault or construction 
(quality) fault, such situation is reduced in this method of contract.  
The contractor is unable to look to the owner for additional compensation.
In this contract, the project can often be completed within a shorter period of time than with the 
traditional three-party arrangement. 
Since a design built project can be designed and constructed in phases, the contractor is able to 
order necessary materials for subsequent phases ahead of time perhaps at a reduced cost.
ContractorÔÇÖs control over design details allows the contractor to use familiar construction methods 
and processes in building the structure, with the result of efficient construction, saving ultimately 
benefit the owner. 
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Design and Built Construction (Turn Key Contract)
Disadvantages:
´âİFor owner it is often difficult to effectively compare the various preliminary 
design proposals. The designs will probably not be uniform.
´âİThe ownerÔÇÖs input on the detailed design of the structure will be limited.
´âİThe owner may not obtain the lowest cost for the project 
´âİThere is only limited scope for the owner to make changes to his requirements.
´âİThe owner has less control and influence over design matters due to which 
quality may be impaired. 
Target Contract:
´âİIn this contract, a target of cost is fixed before execution. 
´âİIf the work is completed as per target, target amount and agreed percentage is 
paid.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Construction Arrangement 
a) Traditional Approach: 
´âİIn  this approach, there is cooperation between owner and consultant 
´âİThere is also cooperation between owner and contractor/subcontractors as well 
´âİBut no cooperation between consultant and contractor. 
´âİBecause of this, there may arise problem in smooth execution of the project and may impact in 
cost and quality of work. So, it may create conflict among the three stakeholders (i.e. owner, 
Consultant and contractor)
b) Design-Built Approach: 
´âİContractor design and built the facility
´âİNo role of consultant
´âİFast and estimate high 
C) BOOT Model:  
´âİBOOT- Build Own Operate & Transfer
´âİBuild and own by private organization, operate up to specified period and transfer to the 
government with free of cost. 
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Construction Arrangement 
d) Owner-Builder Approach: 
´âİOwner builds the facility using itÔÇÖs own resources.
´âİIt has itÔÇÖs own design section /construction department.
e) Construction Management Approach: 
A team of construction professionals are selected to co-ordinate each activity.
f) Labor Contract 
g) Material Contract 
h) Equipment Contract
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
5.3 Tendering Process
Tender, Bid, Bid Price, Ask Price, Tendering and Tender Document: 
´âİA tender is an invitation to bid for a project or accept a formal offer such as a takeover 
bid.
´âİA tender is essentially an official letter that the organizations have to send for the 
procurement of the goods and services required on a large scale. 
´âİFor the execution of projects also tender notice is required. Thus, the tenders are filled 
when an invitation is received for bidding.
´âİIn business terms, Tender is an invitation from a buyer who requires particular goods or 
services to suppliers of those products to put in negotiable price bids.
´âİA bid price is the highest price that a buyer is willing to pay for a goods. It is usually 
referred to simply as the "bid". In bid and ask, the bid price stands in contrast to the ask 
price or "offer", and the difference between the two is called the bid.
´âİTendering usually refers to the process whereby governments and financial institutions 
invite bids for large projects that must be submitted within a finite deadline.
´âİTendering is the process of making an offer, bid or proposal, or expressing interest in 
response to an invitation or request for tender.
´âİA tender document is a written request sent to potential suppliers to ask for information 
required for the buyer.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Tendering Process
Tender Notice:
´âİInvitation by client to eligible bidders / contractors to submit proposal (bid / tender) to construct 
the facility or to supply materials through public notice (media).
Process to be completed before inviting tender:
´âİDesk Study
´âİField survey
´âİDesign, drawing, specification
´âİRate analysis & cost estimation
´âİApproval of budget
´âİTender / bid documents preparation
´âİTender notice publication
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Tendering Process
Essential for Tender Notice: 
´âİImplementing agency (ClientÔÇÖs name / address)
´âİNotice No
´âİFirst date of publication
´âİContract No, description of work and location 
´âİBid Security / Earnest money deposit
´âİBidding documents (details of job, including items of work, drawings, specification and location 
etc.) fee.
´âİOffice to buy bidding documents and submit tender
´âİLast date of submission of bid
´âİCost estimate of the project
´âİName of authority to accept or reject the tender
´âİDate, place and time for opening of the tender
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Tendering Process
Tender Document:  It is a document prepared by the concerned firm making invitation to bid for 
submission by bidder by filling up the price or rate. It includes the following documents.
´âİBid form
´âİSample (Format) of Letter of Acceptance (LOA), General Condition of Contract (GCOC) and Special 
Condition of Contract (SCOC)
´âİSpecifications
´âİBOQ
´âİTender drawings
´âİSample form of bid security, performance security, advance guaranty
´âİQualification certificates
While preparing tender document, following standard bidding documents (SBD) are used.
FIDIC: Federation Internationale Des Ingenieurs Conseils. (Which means ÔÇ£International Federation 
of Consulting EngineersÔÇØ)
WB: World Bank
ADB: Asian Development Bank
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Tendering Process 
General Tendering Process
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Tendering Process 
General Tendering Process
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Tendering Process 
Tendering Process
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Tendering Process 
Construction Tender Process
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Tendering Process 
General Tendering Process
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Tendering Process 
Tender Procurement Process
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Tendering Process 
Steps in a Typical E-tendering Process 
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
Tendering Process 
Condition of Contract: 
´âİContracts are legal agreement  binding both the owner and the contractor.
´âİIt is very important to have all the terms clearly spelled out for easy functioning of the contract & 
to minimize the disputes between the contracting parties.   
´âİSuch conditions are called Condition of Contract (COC). There are two types of COC.   
a) General Condition of Contract (GCOC): It is almost same for all types of contract. The documents 
are copied from FIDICÔÇÖs / WBÔÇÖs / ADBÔÇÖs standard bidding document. 
´âİDefinition and interpretations
´âİTime for completion and delays
´âİPayment to contractors
´âİExecution of work and measurement of completed work
´âİBreach of contract 
´âİArbitration- settlement of contract
´âİSuspension of work
´âİGeneral obligation of contractors
´âİLabor and labor welfare
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
Tendering Process 
b) Special Conditions of Contract (SCOC)
Definition:
´âİIt is special for specific project / contract.
´âİSome conditions may be changed by mutual agreement between the parties.
´âİWhich may be based on law of country, nature of work etc. 
´âİAll the clauses of GCOC canÔÇÖt be applicable universally. So, they need 
modification, addition or alternation depending up on the type and nature of the 
project. 
´âİSome clauses may need revisions because of legal requirement of the countries.
´âİSome country specific/ project specific/ location specific additional clauses might 
also be required. These are provided in separate part and are called Special 
Condition of Contract.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
Tendering Process 
Following aspect should therefore be covered in SCOC.
´âİDetailing of provisions which have been treated generally in GCOC.
´âİDeletion of any provisions which have been treated generally in GCOC. 
´âİAmendment of any provision in GCOC to cover more specifically or appropriately the 
requirements of contract  in hand.
´âİAddition of further provision deemed necessary for the satisfactory administration and execution 
of the contract. 
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Prequalification  
Prequalification (PQ):
´âİThe assessment by an implementing agency of suitability of firms to carry out a 
particular contract prior to being invited to submit a bid is a process called 
prequalification. 
´âİA process of evaluating and determining whether potential bidders have the skill, 
judgment, integrity, sufficient financial resources, and ability necessary to the faithful 
performance of a contract for construction or repair work. 
´âİIt is a kind of short listing of eligible bidders to avoid crowding of them. 
´âİIt ensures that the invitation to bids extends only to those perspective bidders who have 
adequate capacity and resources to perform the particular contract. 
´âİPrequalification requirement shall be basically for the large and complex works, 
industrial plant with high costs goods procurement or to identify the potential bidders.
´âİIn order to prequalify for the proposed works, the applicant should meet all the criteria
as defined in the Prequalification document.
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
Prequalification 
Prequalification Process:
´âİEach prospective bidder on contracts identified for prequalification shall submit an 
application on the approved prequalification application form in order to become 
prequalified.
´âİThe approved prequalification application form will require information to be provided 
on the ownership of the firm, experience of firmÔÇÖs personnel, any affiliations with other 
construction firms, bonding capacity, financial resources, the type of work performed by 
the firm, and other objective criteria rationally related to the particular contract to be 
awarded.
´âİThe Bid Agent shall ensure that applications prepared for the projects comply with this 
policy and State law. 
´âİThe application is to be submitted by the deadline established in the notice of 
prequalification.
´âİThe notice must be posted on a national news paper giving period of minimum of two 
weeks.
´âİThe act of submitting the application does not permit the firm to submit a bid. 
´âİIncomplete applications will be rejected.
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
Prequalification 
The application shall at a minimum, address the following items:
a) Organizational Structure
´âİThe firm shall provide a list of all owners, officers, partners, or individuals authorized to represent 
or conduct business for or sign legal documents for the firm. 
´âİThis list must include the full legal name, typed or printed in a clear legible form. 
´âİFirms experiencing changes in ownership, organizational structure, or material changes in assets 
must inform the Bid Agent prior to the award of a contract. 
´âİFailure of the firm to comply with this requirement may result in the termination of any contract 
awarded
b) Classification 
´âİThe firm shall indicate the type(s) of work the firmÔÇÖs workforce and equipment normally perform, 
licensure, and other pertinent information.
c) Experience
´âİThe firm shall furnish a history documenting experience with projects of similar size, scope, or 
complexity involving the type(s) of work for which prequalification is requested.
d) Financial
´âİFirms will be required to provide a minimum of one year of complete audited financial 
statements. 
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
Prequalification 
e) Litigation / Claims 
´âİThe firm will be required to submit information regarding its litigation history, including litigation 
with owners and subcontractors.
f) Timeliness  
´âİFirms must provide information on its success at completing projects on time, including the 
payment of liquidated damages.
g) Capacity 
´âİFirms shall demonstrate sufficient bonding capacity, insurance and resources for the project. 
´âİFirms must provide relevant information on the personnel that will be directly responsible for the 
work, including the location of the office that will be primarily responsible for work.
h) Safety 
´âİFirms shall also demonstrate an acceptable safety history. 
´âİFirms must provide copies of any complaints, safety violations or reports. 
i) Legal Authorization 
´âİThe Applicant must provide a copy of License, or provide a statement indicating that they are able 
to acquire one before submitting a bid on a project. If a statement is required, the Applicant shall 
identify the states in which they are licensed for this type of work. 
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
Prequalification 
Review of Application 
a) Prequalification Committee 
The Project Manager shall establish a Prequalification Committee for each project to review and score 
applications submitted by the firms to determine the prequalification eligibility.
b) Review of Applications
´âİThe Prequalification Committee shall use an objective assessment process and criteria for that specific 
project. 
´âİThe prequalification criteria shall not require the firm to have previously been awarded a construction or 
repair pro
´âİThe prequalification criteria used by the Prequalification Committee shall include prequalification scoring 
values and the minimum required score to be prequalified for the project. 
´âİThe Prequalification Committee shall approve or deny the applications in accordance with the 
prequalification criteria and scoring system.
c) Notice of Decision
´âİThe firms shall be promptly notified in writing of the Prequalification CommitteeÔÇÖs decision.
´âİThe notification to a contractor determined not to be prequalified shall include the reason(s) for denial. 
´âİNotice shall be provided prior to the advertisement of bids for the project and with sufficient time for the 
firm to protest the denial of prequalification. 
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
Prequalification 
Selection Process: 
A) Quality Based System (QBS) 
´âİThe best and most qualified consultant is selected as first ranking and negotiation is done for 
financial term. 
´âİIf negotiation is successful job is awarded to first ranking if not second ranking consultant is 
called for negotiation.
B)Quality and Cost Based System (QCBS)
´âİEvaluation is done considering both technical capacity and financial terms in accordance to the 
weightage given to each categories.
´âİThe consultant with highest combined score will be awarded for the job.  
C) Cost Based System (CBS)
´âİAmong the technically qualified consultant, job is awarded to the consultant with lowest financial 
proposal .
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
Prequalification of Contractor
Following are Considerations for Prequalification of Contractor.
1) Turnover of Contractors:
Average Turn Over (AAT) = (2xV)/T
Where, V= Value of contract & T= Time in years
If AAT of a contractor is less, Joint venture may be the solution for bidding (PQ).
2) Similar Work Experience: It is taken as (0.8 V). Where, V is the value of contract.
3) Equipment: Types and number of equipment accommodated by the contractor.  
4) Financial Status: Net worth must be positive. Sufficient working capital 
(minimum of 4 to 6 months) 
5) Manpower: Once PQ is carried out; list of prequalified contractor is published or 
announced.  
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
Advantages and Disadvantages of PQ
Advantages:
´âİTo avoid expense of bidding for insufficiently qualified contractor/ consultant or to form a joint 
venture that may give a better chance of success. 
´âİWith prequalification, well qualified firms will price their bids with the knowledge that they are 
competing against other qualified bidders meeting realistic minimum competence criteria.
´âİIt helps to expose potential conflicts of interest.
´âİIt reduces the time to evaluate the bids.
´âİIt encourages the local firms
´âİIt reduces significantly problems of rejection associated to low priced bid. 
Disadvantages:
´âİIt may increase the procurement lead time.
´âİThe employer is required to review all PQ applications for shortlisting
´âİThe element of subjective judgment required by evaluators when applying the prequalification 
criteria to a number of applicants.
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
Post Qualification (Post-Q)
´âİIf qualification is done after bidding, it is called post qualification.
´âİContractor submit both technical and financial proposal together. First technical qualification 
(proposal) is evaluated then only the bids of qualified bidders are opened.
´âİBids of disqualified bidders will be returned unopened.  
´âİThere are two options:
1) Single Stage One Envelop
´âİIn this procedure, bidders submit bids in one envelop containing both the financial and technical 
proposal. The envelopes are opened in public at the specified date and time.
´âİThe financial lowest bidder is identified first and then after evaluation is done in technical aspect 
whether the lowest bidder is technically qualified.
´âİIf the lowest bidder is not technically qualified, technical proposal of second lowest bidder is 
evaluated and so on to award the job. 
37

--- PAGE 38 ---
Post Qualification (Post-Q)
2) Single Stage Two Envelop:
´âİIn this procedure, bidders submit two sealed envelops simultaneously, one 
financial and other technical proposal, enclosed together in an outer single 
envelop. 
´âİInitially, technical proposals are opened and evaluated at the specified date and 
time. The financial proposal remains sealed.
´âİFinancial proposals then opened in public at specified date and time for only the 
bidders who passed technically. Among them lowest price bid is selected.  
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
Tender Evaluation, Selection and Award of Bidder 
Tender Evaluation
´âİOnce bid is opened, that has to be checked against arithmetical corrections, 
signature of authorized persons, bid security (2 ÔÇô 3 % of value of contract) and itÔÇÖs 
validity etc. to find out the lowest responsive bid to award the contract.
´âİBid security is refunded to unsuccessful bidders. If successful bidder fails to carry 
out the contract, this amount is lost. 
Selection and Award of Bidder 
´âİOnce the lowest responsive bid is identified and recommended for award of job 
by bid evaluation committee, decision is taken for award of contract. 
´âİA Letter of Acceptance (LOA) is issued requesting the selected bidder to submit 
performance security (5 ÔÇô 13 % value of contract) and to sign the contract. 
´âİOnce the contract is signed (awarded), bid security of other bidders will be 
returned. 
39
