
--- PAGE 1 ---
Chapter 6: Construction Process 
6.1 Site Surveying and Preparation
It is the inspection of an area where work is proposed, to gather information for 
a design or an estimate to complete the initial tasks required for an outdoor 
activity. 
It can determine a precise location, access, best orientation for the site and the 
location of obstacles'.
The aim of survey is take all information from existing / new site to provide better 
solution and helpful network.  
The basic tools used for site survey is camera, GPS, compass, safety tools (e. g. 
belt, helmet, shoes, etc.)
Procedure: Pre-survey Preparation Survey activity Survey analysis Design 
and solution Implementation
1

--- PAGE 2 ---
Site Surveying and Preparation
A good site survey will help to determine the feasibility of the desired coverage.
The process of performing a site survey includes the following steps: 
Gather tools and configuration 
Research and investigate industry specific concerns
Gather the recommended equipment list / site survey kit
Implement the site survey
Document the site survey
Before survey, all the related personnel are called to have survey preparation 
coordination meeting having the following objectives 
Arranging survey and coordination personnel
Preparing vehicle and equipment
Making survey plan and confirming survey route
Offering the primary schemes of transmission and power 
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Site Surveying and Preparation
Setting Out
To locate the point on the ground as per the drawing / location map with the help of 
reference point. 
We have to assign the location for major types of construction materials, equipment and 
facilities (e.g. cement, sand, gravel, brick, rebar, mixture, tower crane, other equipment, 
house for officer,  house for labor,  office house, guard house, toilet and gate etc.)
Job/Site layout can be defined as site space allocation for material storage, working 
areas, units of accommodation, plant positions, general circulation areas and also access 
and egress for deliveries and emergency services.
It is imperative that every construction project should be organized and executed in the 
most economical and safest manner.
To aid on the smooth execution of the project, a job layout is prepared.
This a scaled drawing of the proposed construction site showing all the relevant features 
such as entry and exit points to the site, storage areas for materials, contractors offices, 
area keeping for equipment such as mixer, bar bending area, labor housing, toilets etc.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Site Layout Plan
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Site Layout Plan
Site Layout / Job Layout of a building project
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Site Layout Plan
Construction Site Layout 
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
6.2 Job Layout
The larger and more complex the project, greater will be the need for 
planned job layout and detailing at site. 
Job/Site layout can be defined as site space allocation for material storage, 
working areas, units of accommodation, plant positions, general circulation areas 
and also access and egress for. deliveries and emergency services
It is imperative that every construction project should be organized and executed 
in the most economical and safest manner.
To aid on the smooth execution of the project, a job layout is prepared.
This a scaled drawing of the proposed construction site showing all the relevant 
features such as entry and exit points to the site, storage areas for materials, 
contractors offices, area keeping for equipment such as mixer, bar bending area, 
labor housing, toilets etc.
It is also necessity that first aid kits are kept in the site engineer’s office.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Job Layout
The following factors should be considered in preparing site layout:
Nature, Scope and Type of work: - the nature of site layout depends majorly on 
the type of work to be carried out, e. g. the site layout for a dam would be much 
more complicated and extensive as compared to that of a residential building.
Topography of the site: - the topography of the site i.e. location, size, nature of 
terrain etc. of the site also effect the site layout. e. g. the site layout in case of 
rocky mountains terrain would be vastly different from that in case of a plain 
terrain.
Methods adopted for execution of work: - the method selected for the 
execution of work deeply affects the nature of site layout e.g. if the work is 
carried out mostly mechanically i.e. using more equipment and less labor, more 
emphasis has to be placed on providing facilities for the machinery than for the 
workers.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Job Layout
The following are the advantages of a good job layout: -
Smooth and economical working of the project.
Reduces the completion time of the project.
Provides more safety in the working of the project.
Material wastage and deterioration are reduced.
Material transactions become easy, speedy and economical.
Increases the output from labor and machinery.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
6.3 Material Handling
Material handling is the movement, protection, storage and control 
of materials and products throughout manufacturing, warehousing, 
distribution, consumption and disposal.
It establishes a plan which includes basic requirements, desirable 
alternates and planning for contingency.
It integrates handling and storage activities, which is cost effective 
into integrated system design.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Material Handling
Advantages of Effective Material Handling
Improve customer service
Reduce inventory excesses
Shorten delivery times
Lower overall handling costs in manufacturing, distribution and transportation
Enhance handling through streamlining and better timing
Facilitate product control through better monitoring and management
Improve inventory management and the accuracy of information through real-
time monitoring
Least handling is the best handling
Research has shown that best handling of construction materials can reduce cost 
by 4 to 5 % of total cost.  
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
6.4 Financial Management & Cash Flow Management 
Financial Management 
A construction financial manager's background often indicates the areas in which 
the manager will concentrate. 
For example, a construction financial manager whose background is 
in construction operations (estimating and project management) initially will 
concentrate on the proper recording of job costs.
Up to submission of tender; contractors have to spend in buying tender 
documents (Rs.1000 to 10,0000), field visit, preparing bid /tender 
(approximately 1% of bid amount) and bid security (2.5 % of bid amount)
After selection; certain amount is required for signing contract ad performance 
security deposit. 
Contractor may get certain amount (about 20% of contract amount) as 
mobilization fund.      
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Financial Management/ Cash Flow 
Financial Issues:
Lack of financial facilities restrict growth of construction industry
Lengthy and cumbersome disbursement and payment procedures lead to project delay.
Management Deficiencies: 
Some contractors and consultants lack professional management.
Inadequate research and development.
Lack of capacity in Project Managers.
A cash flow forecast (also called a 'cash flow budget' or 'cash flow projection') helps identify whether a 
firm needs to borrow, how much, when, and how it will repay the loan. 
Building a cash flow forecast allows an evaluation of cash resources that are required and when they 
are required.
Project Cash Flow:
Project cash flow is the net cash flow associated with the project for that year. 
Project Cash Flow = Sources of Cash – Uses of Cash.
Project Financial Planning provides a way to indicate the cash flow incidence for the account 
or project.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram
Project cash flow diagrams are used as a tool to visualize the costs of an investment. 
In cash flow diagrams, x-axis is time and y-axis is the money that is made or lost during a time 
period.  
Typically money that is being invested or paid out are drawn pointing down from the time axis 
and money that is being returned is drawn pointing up.  
Tips For Managing Cash Flows On Construction Projects
Know your client
Start with a realistic and profitable estimate
Perform a cash flow forecast or projection
Negotiate favorable contract terms
Be aggressive in collecting payments
Stay on top of change orders
Close out the project
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Project Cash Flow
Best practices for managing a healthy cash flow are as below:
1) Identify business risks & prepare in advance
2) Create a separate bank account for your business
3) Monitor your inventory efficiently
4) Always keep buffer money
5) Implement better system to manage cash flow
6) Control cash outflows
7) Keep your cash growing
8) Do not focus on profit, focus on cash flow. If your cash flow is in order, your profit will be 
in order. 
Without cash, profits are meaningless. 
Many a profitable business on paper has ended up in bankruptcy because the amount of 
cash coming in doesn’t compare with the amount of cash going out. 
Firms that don’t exercise good cash management may not be able to make the 
investments needed to compete, or they may have to pay more to borrow money to 
function.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram 
Project Cash Flow
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram 
Typical Cash Flow Profile of BOT Project
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram 
Real Construction Cash Flow (if no mobilization cost)
Cumulative
Amount RS.  
In 1000 
Time Period in months/year
Profit
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram 
Net Cash Flow ( if no mobilization cost) 
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram 
Cash Flow
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram
Project Cash Flow Diagram (no mobilization fund / mobilization fund available)
21
