=== Ch1 (40 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Construction Management
´âİMonday, Wednesday and Friday (6 periods per week)
Book suggested:
´üÂConstruction Project Management: By K.K Chitkara
´üÂConstruction Management and Machinery : BL Gupta, Gupta, Amit
´üÂConstruction planning Equipment and Methods: By R.L Peurifoy
´üÂConstruction Plant Excavating and Handling Equipment and Methods: 
By Harris, Frank
´üÂConstruction Management: By R.P. Adhikari
´üÂEstimating, Valuation and Specifications: By G. S.Birdie
´üÂText Book of Construction Management: By S.K. Shrestha, R. K. 
Shrestha & S.K. Bhattarai  
By MRD 
1

--- Page 2 ---
Chapter 1: Construction Management Framework
1.1 Construction Landmarks:
ÔÇó An object or feature of a landscape or town that is easily seen and recognized from a distance,
ÔÇó Especially one that enables someone to establish their location
ÔÇó WorldÔÇÖs famous Construction which inspire us are Construction Landmarks
ÔÇó Land marks give us sense of place 
ÔÇó An event or discovery marking an important stage or turning point in something is land mark
Examples:
´âİAngkor: Siem Reap, Cambodia
´âİSydney Opera House: Sydney
´âİThe Eiffel Tower: Paris
´âİTaj Mahal: Agra, India
´âİBurj Khalifa: Dubai, United Arab Emirates
´âİMachu Picchu: Machu Picchu Archaeological Park, Peru
´âİThe Great Wall of China: China
2

--- Page 3 ---
Examples of Construction Land Marks
´âİWorldÔÇÖs tallest building
´âİWorldÔÇÖs longest bridge
´âİWorldÔÇÖs longest water tunnel
´âİWorldÔÇÖs longest railway land tunnel
´âİWorldÔÇÖs highest dam
´âİWorldÔÇÖs largest floor area of Building etc.
3

--- Page 4 ---
1.2 Scope of Construction Management
´âİBasic needs of human being:  Food, Clothing and Shelter
´âİFirst Natural shelter is Cave
´âİSecond is plat form on trees to protect from animals
´âİThird small houses 
´âİConstruction is the indicator of civilization
´âİIndicator of development of the nation is development of 
Infrastructure 
´âİNational development is directly linked with the development of 
construction activities
´âİA single individual canÔÇÖt do all the works
4

--- Page 40 ---
1.6 Relationship between Client, Consultant and Contractor
´âİThere must be team work approach among the three parties
´âİEach party must have supportive role with another 
´âİEach of them must follow their role and responsibility
´âİOwner must provide the sufficient fund on time
´âİConsultant must prepare the design as per interest of Owner 
´âİContractor should complete the execution work maintaining quality
and schedule saving cost  
40


=== Ch2 (45 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Chapter 2: Construction Planning and Scheduling 
2.1 Construction Planning
a) Definition:
´âİPlanning is the mental process deciding about the future line of 
action
´âİIt is the course of action to achieve the desired result taking in to 
consideration the present needs and future requirement
´âİDeciding about what to do, when to do, who will do and where to do 
is planning 
´âİVarious alternative methods of execution of work are studied at the 
planning stage and decisions are taken for each part of work 
By MRD 
1

--- Page 2 ---
Planning
2

--- Page 3 ---
Planning
b) Objectives of Planning:
´âİProper design of each element
´âİProper selection of equipment
´âİProper arrangement and repair of equipment
´âİProcurement of required materials in advance
´âİEnsure employment of trained and experienced staff
´âİTo provide welfare schemes for staffs
´âİTo provide incentives to good worker
´âİTo arrange constant flow of fund
´âİTo provide proper safety measures
´âİTo provide proper arrangement of communication
3

--- Page 4 ---
Planning
c) Principles of Planning:
´âİPlan should be readily understandable (i.e. simple language & able 
to convey correct message)
´âİIt should be realistic, flexible and comprehensive 
´âİCan be used as the basis for monitoring and controlling the project
4

--- Page 45 ---
Tutorial 5. (Time Cost Trade Off) 
The net work schedule and 
necessary data of a construction 
project are given. Compute the 
Optimum duration and least cost 
schedule. The overhead of the 
project is $650. 
45


=== Ch3 (50 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Chapter 3: Planning Construction Materials
3.1 ABC Classification of Materials
a) Definition:
By MRD

--- Page 2 ---
Definition (ABC Classification)
By MRD

--- Page 3 ---
Definition (ABC Classification)
Group (Class)
Total Items (Stock)
Inventory Cost
A
10 ´ÇÑ(5-15 ´ÇÑ)
70 ´ÇÑ
B
20 ´ÇÑ(15-25 ´ÇÑ)
20 ´ÇÑ
C
70 ´ÇÑ(65-75 ´ÇÑ)
10 ´ÇÑ
By MRD

--- Page 4 ---
Graphical Representation (ABC Classification)
By MRD

--- Page 50 ---
Creating Value Analysis Awareness
Value analysis awareness for material procurement order can be done by 
using following checklist:
´âİIf the function doesnÔÇÖt add any thing desirable eliminate it
´âİExplore better and cheaper alternate
´âİIf the component performing function is a non standard, locate the 
standard item
´âİModification: If the cost of the item is not reasonable
´âİConsumption reduction: If the consumption of the item can be cut down 
by value analysis. 
´âİRedesigning components
´âİMake Decision
´âİSupply Source
´âİImported Components
By MRD


=== Ch4 (89 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Chapter 4: Familiarization with Construction Equipment
4.1 Advantages and Drawbacks of Using Equipment
Advantages:
´âİIncrease the rate of output of work
´âİReduce the overall construction cost
´âİCarry out activities which canÔÇÖt be done by manually
´âİEquipment can work in adverse weather climate and topography
´âİReduce fatigue and eliminates hazards & health issues
´âİMaintain the planned rate of production where there is shortage of labor
´âİMaintain high quality standards  
´âİEquipment is free from social and emotional factors
´âİIt helps maintaining construction site safer and cleaner                               
1

--- Page 2 ---
Advantages and Disadvantages Using Equipment
Drawbacks:
´âİIf the machine breaks down, it can cause delay of construction
´âİElectric tools can cause short circuit which may result in fire
´âİOnly trained and skilled labor can operate the equipment
´âİIt may harm health of the people on site
´âİHeavy investment for buying equipment
´âİLarge inventory of spare parts
´âİMay create social problem due the unemployment of people
´âİReselling / disposing off  construction equipment will be a problem   
2

--- Page 3 ---
4.2 Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction 
A)
Earth Work Equipment
´âİExcavating Equipment:
Excavator, Back Hoes, Dozer, Scraper, Drag Line, Power Sovel & Grader  
´âİWatering and Dewatering Equipment:
´éğDisplacement Pump (Reciprocating Pump, Diaphram)
´éğCentrifugal Pump (Conventional, Self-Priming, Air-Operated)
´âİLoading Equipment: 
´âİTransporting Equipment: 
Dozer, Grader, Scraper, Power Sovel, Drag Line, Tractor, Triger, Dumper   
´âİCompacting Equipment:
Tamping Rod, Hand Compactor, Tamping Roller, Smooth Wheel Roller, Pneumatic 
Roller, Sheep Foot Roller, Vibrating Roller, Rammer, Frog Rammer, 
3

--- Page 4 ---
Equipment Used in Different Types of Construction
´âİDrilling and Blasting Equipment:  
Jack Hammer, Drifter, Wagon Drill, Track Mounted Drill, 
B) Lifting and Erecting Equipment: Fixed Crane (Tower Crane)
C) Concerting Equipment:
´âİAggregate Production Equipment: 
Primary Crusher, Secondary Crusher, Tertiary Crusher, Screening
´âİAggregate Handling Equipment: 
Truck, Dumper, Conveyor Belt
´âİConcrete Mixing Equipment: 
Hand fed drum mixture, Self loading drum mixture, Concrete mixing pan, 
Transit mixture, Mixing plant
4

--- Page 89 ---
Criteria for Selecting Construction Equipment
Price: 
ÔÇó Ensure that the machine is appropriately priced for what it has to offer. 
ÔÇó Considering a 10% per year depreciation value, a machine should last for atlas 10 
years, pay for itself and earn profits if one has to buy a machine. 
ÔÇó Most buyers ask cheaper products and expect them to last at least 2-4 project 
cycles. 
ÔÇó When it comes to machines various costs come into play. 
ÔÇó The yearly depreciation of the machineÔÇÖs value, fuel costs, insurance, storage, 
maintenance, logistic costs, operator costs and spare parts cost to name a few. 
ÔÇó Take these things into consideration when wanting to select the construction 
equipment.
89


=== Ch5 (39 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Chapter 5: Contract Management
5.1 Method of Work Execution
´âİSurvey
´éğDesk Study (completed)
´éğPreliminary Survey (completed)
´éğDetailed Survey (going on)
´âİDesign, Drawing and Specification
´âİCost Estimate 
´âİApproval 
´âİTendering Process
´éğTender Notice
´éğTender document preparation 
´éğBuying/ selling tender documents by prospective bidder
´éğSubmission of bid/tender by bidders
´éğEvaluation of bid
´éğSelection of contractor  
´éğSigning / award of contract 
1

--- Page 2 ---
Method of Work Execution
Generally owner have following choices for work execution
1) Amanat:
´âİWorks are executed by the owner itself, by hiring workers and supplying materials and 
equipment. 
´âİThe record of labor employed, materials and equipment are maintained in book keeping. 
´âİIt is useful for small work, if it is necessary to do immediately and expertise are available 
with in the organization. 
´âİIt saves the cost and keeps the staff busy in work.
2) Negotiation: 
´âİContract is awarded through negotiation with the contractor. 
3) Contract: 
´âİIt is the agreement between two of more parties to do or not to do any work. 
´âİIt is legal and time bound 
´âİOffer and acceptance must be there. 
2

--- Page 3 ---
Method of Work Execution
As per public procurement act of Nepal, there are following provisions of work   
Execution.
A) Sealed Competitive Bidding: Contractor is selected based on the competition among 
the bidders (contractors).
1) International Competitive Bidding (ICB)
´âİIt will be as per agreement with donor agency. 
´âİIf Nepalese contractors have no experience or not capable. 
´âİIf no bid is submitted by Nepalese contractors in stated time.
´âİNotice on invitation to tender and all tender or prequalification documents shall be 
published in English language. 
´âİIn publishing a notice a period of at least 45 days shall be given
´âİNotice shall be published in daily newspaper of national and international 
communication media.
´âİNotice shall be placed in website of concerned entity or that of the Public Procurement 
Monitoring office (PPMO).
3

--- Page 4 ---
Method of Work Execution
2) National / Local  Competitive Bidding (NCB/LCB) 
´âİContractors are invited from within the nation or local.
´âİIf Construction work estimated exceeds Rs. Twenty lakhs.
´âİGood & services estimated exceeds Rs. Ten lakhs.
´âİIn publishing a notice a period of at least 30 days shall be given
´âİNotice shall be published in daily newspaper of national and it may also be published in 
international communication media. 
´âİNotice shall be placed in website of concerned entity or that of (PPMO). 
B) Sealed Quotation (SQ)
´âİTime required for this is shorter than NCB.
´âİIf Construction work estimated less or equal to Rs. Twenty lakhs.
´âİGood & services estimated less or equal to Rs. Ten lakhs.
4

--- Page 39 ---
Tender Evaluation, Selection and Award of Bidder 
Tender Evaluation
´âİOnce bid is opened, that has to be checked against arithmetical corrections, 
signature of authorized persons, bid security (2 ÔÇô 3 % of value of contract) and itÔÇÖs 
validity etc. to find out the lowest responsive bid to award the contract.
´âİBid security is refunded to unsuccessful bidders. If successful bidder fails to carry 
out the contract, this amount is lost. 
Selection and Award of Bidder 
´âİOnce the lowest responsive bid is identified and recommended for award of job 
by bid evaluation committee, decision is taken for award of contract. 
´âİA Letter of Acceptance (LOA) is issued requesting the selected bidder to submit 
performance security (5 ÔÇô 13 % value of contract) and to sign the contract. 
´âİOnce the contract is signed (awarded), bid security of other bidders will be 
returned. 
39


=== Ch6 (21 pages) ===

--- Page 1 ---
Chapter 6: Construction Process 
6.1 Site Surveying and Preparation
´âİIt is the inspection of an area where work is proposed, to gather information for 
a design or an estimate to complete the initial tasks required for an outdoor 
activity. 
´âİIt can determine a precise location, access, best orientation for the site and the 
location of obstacles'.
´âİThe aim of survey is take all information from existing / new site to provide better 
solution and helpful network.  
´âİThe basic tools used for site survey is camera, GPS, compass, safety tools (e. g. 
belt, helmet, shoes, etc.)
´âİProcedure: Pre-survey ´Ç¥Preparation ´Ç¥Survey activity ´Ç¥Survey analysis ´Ç¥Design 
and solution ´Ç¥Implementation
1

--- Page 2 ---
Site Surveying and Preparation
´âİA good site survey will help to determine the feasibility of the desired coverage.
´âİThe process of performing a site survey includes the following steps: 
´éğGather tools and configuration 
´éğResearch and investigate industry specific concerns
´éğGather the recommended equipment list / site survey kit
´éğImplement the site survey
´éğDocument the site survey
´âİBefore survey, all the related personnel are called to have survey preparation 
coordination meeting having the following objectives 
´éğArranging survey and coordination personnel
´éğPreparing vehicle and equipment
´éğMaking survey plan and confirming survey route
´éğOffering the primary schemes of transmission and power 
2

--- Page 3 ---
Site Surveying and Preparation
Setting Out
´âİTo locate the point on the ground as per the drawing / location map with the help of 
reference point. 
´âİWe have to assign the location for major types of construction materials, equipment and 
facilities (e.g. cement, sand, gravel, brick, rebar, mixture, tower crane, other equipment, 
house for officer,  house for labor,  office house, guard house, toilet and gate etc.)
´âİJob/Site layout can be defined as site space allocation for material storage, working 
areas, units of accommodation, plant positions, general circulation areas and also access 
and egress for deliveries and emergency services.
´âİIt is imperative that every construction project should be organized and executed in the 
most economical and safest manner.
´âİTo aid on the smooth execution of the project, a job layout is prepared.
´âİThis a scaled drawing of the proposed construction site showing all the relevant features 
such as entry and exit points to the site, storage areas for materials, contractors offices, 
area keeping for equipment such as mixer, bar bending area, labor housing, toilets etc.
3

--- Page 4 ---
Site Layout Plan
4

--- Page 21 ---
Project Cash Flow Diagram
Project Cash Flow Diagram (no mobilization fund / mobilization fund available)
21


